.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt MANSPLAIN 7
.Os mansplain
.Sh NAME
.Nm mansplain
.Nd generate mdoc(7) man pages from source material
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
generates
.Xr mdoc 7
man pages from source material.
It provides two paths to man page authorship:
.Bl -tag -width convert
.It Cm generate
Uses an LLM to produce man pages from
.Fl -help
output, README files, config files, or any text.
Targets any OpenAI-compatible API.
.It Cm convert
Compiles
.Xr ronn-format 7
markdown to mdoc deterministically.
No LLM, no network, no API key.
.El
.Pp
.Nm
also ships as an agent skill that teaches coding agents
(Claude Code, Cursor, Copilot, Gemini CLI, and others) how to
write man pages using their own model and project context.
.Pp
For the command reference, see
.Xr mansplain 1 .
.Sh INSTALL
.Ss curl | sh
.Bd -literal -offset indent
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/mwunsch/mansplain/main/install.sh | sh
.Ed
.Pp
Installs the binary to
.Pa ~/.local/bin
and man pages to
.Pa ~/.local/share/man .
Override with
.Ev INSTALL_DIR
and
.Ev MAN_BASE
environment variables.
.Ss Go
.Bd -literal -offset indent
go install github.com/mwunsch/mansplain@latest
.Ed
.Pp
Binary only.
Run
.Ql mansplain install man/mansplain.1
afterward to get the man page.
.Ss GitHub Releases
Download prebuilt binaries from
.Lk https://github.com/mwunsch/mansplain/releases "GitHub Releases" .
Each archive includes the binary, man pages, and agent skill.
.Sh GETTING STARTED
Configure the LLM connection:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain configure
.Ed
.Pp
This prompts for a base URL, API key, and model, then saves to
.Pa ~/.config/mansplain/config.toml .
Defaults to the OpenAI API.
For local models, point it at LM Studio or Ollama:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
base_url = "http://localhost:1234/v1"
api_key = "lm-studio"
.Ed
.Pp
Generate a man page:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate --name jq -o jq.1
mansplain generate README.md --name mytool
curl --help | mansplain generate - --name curl
.Ed
.Pp
Generate man pages for config files (section 5) or overviews (section 7):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate config.toml --name myapp.conf --section 5
mansplain generate ARCHITECTURE.md --name myframework --section 7
.Ed
.Pp
Preview and validate:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate --name jq | mandoc -Tutf8 | less
mansplain generate --name jq | mansplain lint -
.Ed
.Sh CONVERT
The
.Cm convert
command compiles
.Xr ronn-format 7
markdown to mdoc.
No LLM required.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain convert man/tool.1.md -o man/tool.1
mansplain convert man/tool.1.md | mansplain lint -
.Ed
.Pp
Ronn-format is markdown with conventions for man pages:
a title line
.Pq Ql name(1) -- description ,
definition lists for options, and angle brackets for arguments.
.Pp
This is useful for ongoing maintenance.
Write the source in markdown, keep it in version control,
and compile to mdoc in your build step.
.Sh AGENT SKILL
Install the skill into any project:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
npx skills add mwunsch/mansplain
.Ed
.Pp
The skill works without the
.Nm
binary.
The agent uses its own model and full project context to write the
man page directly, producing better results than a standalone LLM
call with limited context.
.Pp
The skill teaches the agent to:
.Bl -enum -offset indent
.It
Gather context from the project: source code, README, help output,
config files, error messages.
.It
Determine the appropriate section: 1 for commands, 5 for config
files, 7 for overviews.
.It
Write a complete
.Xr mdoc 7
man page following conventions.
.It
Validate with
.Xr mandoc 1
or
.Nm
.Cm lint .
.It
Place the file at
.Pa man/<name>.<section> .
.El
.Sh WORKING WITH MAN PAGES
Once you have a man page, the standard toolchain takes over:
.Bl -tag -width "mansplain install"
.It Nm mansplain Cm install Ar file
Copy a man page to
.Pa ~/.local/share/man
so
.Xr man 1
can find it.
No sudo required.
.It Xr mandoc 1 Fl Tutf8 Ar file | Xr less 1
Preview a man page in the terminal.
.It Xr apropos 1 Ar keyword
Search installed man pages by keyword.
This is what makes installed man pages discoverable.
.It Xr whatis 1 Ar command
Show the one-line description of a command.
.It Xr manpath 1
Show where
.Xr man 1
looks for pages.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Note :
.Ql man -l file.1
works on Linux but not macOS.
Use
.Ql mandoc -Tutf8 file.1 | less
instead.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mansplain 1 ,
.Xr mandoc 1 ,
.Xr mdoc 7 ,
.Xr ronn-format 7
.Pp
.Lk https://github.com/mwunsch/mansplain
