.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt MANSPLAIN 1
.Os mansplain
.Sh NAME
.Nm mansplain
.Nd generate mdoc(7) man pages from source material
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Cm generate
.Op Fl -from-help Ar command
.Op Fl -name Ar name
.Op Fl -section Ar num
.Op Fl -dry-run
.Op Fl o Ar file
.Op Ar file | -
.Nm
.Cm lint
.Ar file | -
.Nm
.Cm install
.Op Fl -dry-run
.Ar file
.Nm
.Cm convert
.Op Fl o Ar file
.Ar file | -
.Nm
.Cm configure
.Nm
.Op Fl v
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
generates
.Xr mdoc 7
man pages from source material.
The
.Cm generate
command uses an OpenAI-compatible LLM to produce man pages from
.Fl -help
output, README files, config files, or any text passed as input.
The
.Cm convert
command deterministically compiles
.Xr ronn-format 7
markdown to mdoc without an LLM.
.Pp
.Nm
also ships as an agent skill compatible with Claude Code, Cursor, Copilot,
Gemini CLI, and other coding agents.
The skill teaches agents to write man pages directly using their own
model and project context, without requiring the
.Nm
binary.
Install the skill with:
.Pp
.Dl npx skills add mwunsch/mansplain
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width configure
.It Cm generate Op Ar file | -
Generate a man page from source material via LLM.
Source material can be a file given as a positional argument,
.Sq -
for standard input,
.Fl -from-help
to run a command and capture its output,
or
.Fl -name
to automatically run
.Ar name Fl -help .
Multiple sources can be combined.
Use
.Fl -section
to generate man pages for config file formats (section 5) or
conceptual overviews (section 7).
.It Cm lint Ar file | -
Validate an
.Xr mdoc 7
file for structural problems.
Runs
.Xr mandoc 1
.Fl Tlint
if available, checks for required sections
.Pq NAME, SYNOPSIS, DESCRIPTION ,
and warns about missing recommended sections
.Pq OPTIONS, EXAMPLES, EXIT STATUS, SEE ALSO .
.It Cm convert Ar file | -
Convert a
.Xr ronn-format 7
markdown file to
.Xr mdoc 7
source.
No LLM required.
The conversion is deterministic.
See
.Xr ronn-format 7
for the input format.
.It Cm install Ar file
Copy a man page to
.Pa ~/.local/share/man/
so that
.Xr man 1
can find it.
The section number is inferred from the file extension.
.It Cm configure
Interactively set up the LLM connection.
Prompts for base URL, API key, and model.
Saves to
.Pa ~/.config/mansplain/config.toml .
.El
.Sh OPTIONS
Global options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -base-url Ar url
OpenAI-compatible API base URL.
.It Fl -api-key Ar key
API key for authentication.
.It Fl -model Ar name
LLM model to use.
.It Fl v , Fl -version
Print version and exit.
.El
.Pp
Options for
.Cm generate :
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl -from-help Ar command
Run
.Ar command
and capture its output as source material.
.It Fl -name Ar name
Tool name for the man page.
If no source material is provided, runs
.Ar name Fl -help
automatically.
Inferred from source content if not given.
.It Fl -section Ar num
Man page section number.
Section 1 for commands (default), 5 for config file formats,
7 for conceptual overviews.
Affects the structure the LLM is prompted to produce.
.It Fl o , Fl -output Ar file
Write output to
.Ar file
instead of standard output.
.It Fl -dry-run
Print the assembled LLM prompt instead of calling the API.
Does not require an API key.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width MANSPLAIN_BASE_URL
.It Ev MANSPLAIN_API_KEY
API key for authentication.
Overrides the config file.
.It Ev MANSPLAIN_BASE_URL
API base URL.
Overrides the config file.
.It Ev MANSPLAIN_MODEL
Model name.
Overrides the config file.
.It Ev OPENAI_API_KEY
Fallback API key if
.Ev MANSPLAIN_API_KEY
is not set.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Override the base configuration directory.
Defaults to
.Pa ~/.config .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/mansplain/config.toml
Configuration file.
Contains
.Va base_url ,
.Va api_key ,
and
.Va model
fields in TOML format.
.It Pa ~/.local/share/man/
Local man page installation directory used by
.Cm install .
In the default
.Xr manpath 1
on macOS and Linux.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Pp
The
.Cm lint
command exits 0 if the file passes all checks, or 1 if errors are found.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Generate a man page for ripgrep:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate --name rg -o rg.1
.Ed
.Pp
Generate from a README and preview:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate README.md --name mytool | mandoc -Tutf8 | less
.Ed
.Pp
Pipe help output from another tool:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
curl --help | mansplain generate - --name curl -o curl.1
.Ed
.Pp
Document a config file (section 5):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate config.toml --name myapp.conf --section 5
.Ed
.Pp
Write a conceptual overview from architecture docs (section 7):
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate ARCHITECTURE.md --name myframework --section 7
.Ed
.Pp
Convert a ronn-format markdown file to mdoc:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain convert man/tool.1.md -o man/tool.1
.Ed
.Pp
Generate and validate in one pipeline:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate --name jq | mansplain lint -
.Ed
.Pp
See the prompt that would be sent to the LLM:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain generate --dry-run --name rg
.Ed
.Pp
Install a man page locally:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mansplain install rg.1
man rg
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr groff 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr mandoc 1 ,
.Xr manpath 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr mdoc 7 ,
.Xr ronn-format 7
